Initial Gateway API Inference Extension Blog Post (#49898)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-02-21-introducing-gateway-api-inference-extension/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Introducing Gateway API Inference Extension"

> date: 2025-02-21

Reviewer: @danehans can we aim for a day that hasn't been claimed yet next week?

{{< figure src="inference-extension-request-flow.png" alt="Request Flow" class="diagram-large" clicktozoom="true" >}}

1. **Gateway Routing**
   A client sends a request (e.g., an HTTP POST to /completions). The Gateway (like Envoy) examines the HTTPRoute
   and identifies the matching InferencePool backend.

2. **Endpoint Selection**
   Instead of simply forwarding to any pod, the Gateway consults an inference-specific routing extension, e.g. ​endpoint selection extension. This
   extension examines live pod metrics—queue lengths, memory usage, loaded adapters—to pick the best pod for the
   request.

3. **Inference-Aware Scheduling**
   The chosen pod is the one that can handle the request with the lowest latency or highest efficiency, given the
   user’s criticality or resource needs. The Gateway then forwards traffic to that specific pod.

{{< figure src="inference-extension-epp-scheduling.png" alt="Endpoint Extension Scheduling" class="diagram-large" clicktozoom="true" >}}

This extra step provides a smarter, model-aware routing mechanism that still feels like a normal single request to
the client.

> 

Reviewer: Somewhere in this section I think it would be useful to mention the extensible nature of this model, and that new extensions can be developed that will be compatible with any Inference Gateway.

Author: I updated this section based on ^ feedback, PTAL.

## Benchmarks

> We evaluated ​ESE against a standard Kubernetes Service for a [vLLM](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/)‐based serving

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We evaluated ​this extension against a standard Kubernetes Service for a [vLLM](https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/)‐based serving
```

deployment. The test environment consisted of multiple H100 (80 GB) GPU pods running vLLM ([version 1](https://blog.vllm.ai/2025/01/27/v1-alpha-release.html))
on a Kubernetes cluster, with up to 10 replicas. The [Latency Profile Generator (LPG)](https://github.com/AI-Hypercomputer/inference-benchmark)
tool was used to generate traffic and measure throughput, latency, and other metrics. The ShareGPT dataset served
as the workload, and traffic was ramped from 100 Queries per Second (QPS) up to 1000 QPS.

### Key Results

{{< figure src="inference-extension-benchmark.png" alt="Endpoint Extension Scheduling" class="diagram-large" clicktozoom="true" >}}

- **Comparable Throughput**: Throughout the tested QPS range, ESE delivered throughput roughly on par with a standard
  Kubernetes Service.

- **Lower Latency**:
  - **Per‐Output‐Token Latency**: ​ESE showed significantly lower p90 latency at higher QPS (500+), indicating that
  its model-aware routing decisions reduce queueing and resource contention.
  - **Overall p90 Latency**: Similar trends emerged, with the ​ESE reducing end‐to‐end tail latencies compared to the
  baseline, particularly as traffic increased beyond 400–500 QPS.

> These results suggest that ​ESE’s model‐aware routing significantly reduced latency for GPU‐backed LLM workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These results suggest that ​this extension's model‐aware routing significantly reduced latency for GPU‐backed LLM workloads.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Introducing Gateway API Inference Extension"
date: 2025-02-20
slug: introducing-gateway-api-inference-extension
draft: true
---

> **Authors**: Abdullah Gharaibeh (Google), Kellen Swain (Google), Daneyon Hansen (Solo.io), Jiaxin Shan (Bytedance)

Reviewer 2: Hi. We now list the authors within [front matter](https://gohugo.io/content-management/front-matter/); please edit accordingly.

Author: Resolved by commit 3b5f77a.

Using these signals, the extension applies its scheduling policy (the “filter chain”) to select the pod that can best
serve the request according to the configured objectives (e.g. lowest latency)​. This might involve choosing the instance
with the smallest queue and sufficient free GPU memory for the new request.

{{< figure src="inference-extension-epp-scheduling.png" alt="Endpoint Extension Scheduling" class="diagram-large" clicktozoom="true" >}}

Forward to model server: The extension returns its decision to the Gateway, essentially saying “send this request to pod X.”
The Gateway then forwards the traffic to that specific model server pod​. The response from the model will stream back to the
client in reverse order. All of this happens transparently – to the client it looks like a normal single request, but the
Gateway and extension have transparently collaborated to route the request intelligently.

By introducing this extension point in the routing pipeline, the system can make much smarter decisions than a generic
load balancer. It still retains Gateway API for traffic management, but augments it with model-aware routing logic when

> needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
needed.

## Roadmap 

As Inference Gateway builds towards a GA release. We will continue to expand our capabilities, namely:
1. Prefix-cache aware load balancing with interfaces for remote caches 
1. Recommended LoRA adapter pipeline for automated rollout 
1. Fairness and priority between workloads within the same criticality band
1. HPA support for autoscaling on aggregate metrics derived from the load balancer
1. Support for large multi-modal inputs and outputs
1. Support for other GenAI model types (diffusion and other non-completion protocols)
1. Heterogeneous accelerators - serve workloads on multiple types of accelerator using latency and request cost-aware load balancing
1. Disaggregated serving support with independently scaling pools
```

Author: Added in commit 3b5f77a

## Enter Gateway API Inference Extension

> [Gateway API Inference Extension](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/) was created to address this gap by building on the existing [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/),

Reviewer 4: On line 19 above, "... focused on HTTP path routing or ..."?

Author: @smarterclayton I resolved all your feedback in the latest commit other than this comment. Feel free to rereview and/or elaborate. Thanks again for your review.

this gap by building on the existing [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/), adding inference-specific
routing capabilities while retaining the familiar model of Gateways and HTTPRoutes.​ The goal is to improve and
standardize routing to inference workloads across the ecosystem. Key objectives include enabling model-aware
routing, supporting per-request criticalities, facilitating safe model roll-outs, and optimizing load balancing
based on real-time model metrics​. By achieving these, the project aims to reduce latency and improve accelerator

> (GPU) utilization for AI workloads.

Reviewer: +1, I really like this framing, and we should use it as much as we can throughout this post and our docs. 

I started to go a bit farther with this theme and realized that we could write a very compelling blog post with this theme after KubeCon when we have more Gateway implementations ready. That post could be titled "Introducing Kubernetes Inference Gateways", and have a section describing that an Inference Gateway is an "existing gateway + inference extension". To really sell that though, I think we need to have a variety of "Inference Gateways" ready to play with. 

So if we think we'll end up with two separate blog posts here, maybe this initial one is focused on the project _goal_ of extending any existing Gateway with specialized Inference routing capabilities, and then in a follow up blog post we can focus more on the "Inference Gateway" term when we have more examples to work with.

Or maybe we should just hold off on this post until we have more Inference Gateway examples. I'm not sure, open to ideas here.

> (GPU) utilization for AI workloads.

Author: I like planting the "gateway + inference extension = inference gateway" seed here and using a follow-up post to drive the messaging.

   and identifies the matching InferencePool backend.

2. **Endpoint Selection**

>    Instead of simply forwarding to any pod, the Gateway consults an inference-specific routing extension, e.g. ​endpoint selection extension. This

Reviewer 4: maybe instead of 'e.g.'

> Instead of simply forwarding to any available pod, the Gateway consults an inference-specific routing extension - an ​endpoint selection extension - to pick the best of the available pods.

?

Author: Making the ^ change with one minor difference s/an ​endpoint selection extension/the Endpoint Selection Extension/

## Summary

By aligning model serving with Kubernetes-native tooling, Gateway API Inference Extension aims to simplify
and standardize how AI/ML traffic is routed. With model-aware routing, criticality-based prioritization, and
more, it helps ops teams deliver the right LLM services to the right users—smoothly and efficiently.

**Ready to learn more?** Visit the [project docs](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/) to dive deeper,

> give Inference Extension a try with a few [simple steps](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/guides/),

Reviewer 4: I would suggest saying "... give the Inference Gateway extension a try with a few ...".

Reviewer: We probably want to hold off on publishing this until we've updated our guides to use proper "Inference Gateways" instead of Envoy patches. Maybe that's actually an argument for saving this until after KubeCon?

Author: The initial inference extension supported landed in kgateway and I plan on adding an inference extension docs PR in the next few days.
